MGN 394 (M+F) Amendment 1: Local supplier of fuel oil registration
2023-04-19
Source: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/mgn-394-mf-amendment-1-local-supplier-of-fuel-oil-registration

Summary

• The Merchant Shipping (Prevention of Air Pollution from Ships) Regulations 2008, as amended requires that a local supplier of fuel oil register with the Secretary of State.

• Once registered, a local supplier of fuel oil is required to make an annual declaration to remain on the register.

• Contact details for registering and making an annual declaration are provided.

1. Registration and Annual Declaration by a Local Supplier of Fuel Oil

1.1 The Merchant Shipping (Prevention of Air Pollution from Ships) Regulations 2008, as amended require that a local supplier of fuel oil for combustion purposes delivered to and used on board a relevant ship must register with the Secretary of State in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 7 of Merchant Shipping Notice 1819 (M+F).

1.2 A local supplier of fuel oil means a person who receives fuel oil with a view to its delivery to and use on board a relevant ship.

1.3 A relevant ship means (i) a platform; or (ii) a ship, other than a platform, of 400 GT or above.

1.4 All local suppliers of fuel oil must register with the Maritime and Coastguard Agency (MCA) as per the initial declaration outlined in Appendix 2 of MSN 1819 (M+F).

1.5 All local suppliers of fuel oil must provide an annual declaration as detailed in Appendix 3 of MSN 1819 (M+F). If a local supplier of fuel oil does not provide the annual declaration as detailed in Appendix 3 it will be removed from the United Kingdom Government’s list of local fuel suppliers and will no longer be able to supply fuel legally.

2. Registration and Annual Declaration

2.1 A local supplier of fuel oil that is required to register or make an annual declaration should submit their declaration to: environment@mcga.gov.uk.

3. Publication of Register

3.1 The register of local suppliers of fuel oil can be found at:

https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/local-fuel-oil-suppliers-register.

3.2 Any errors in the list of suppliers should be notified to the MCA.

More information

Future Propulsion and Fuel Safety Team, UK Maritime Services
Maritime and Coastguard Agency
Bay 2/23
Spring Place
105 Commercial Road
Southampton
SO15 1EG

Telephone: +44 (0)203 81 72000.

Email: environment@mcga.gov.uk

Website: www.gov.uk/mca

Please note that all addresses and telephone numbers are correct at time of publishing.
