MGN 506 (M) MGN 506 (M) Amendment 1 Navigation: Deep-sea pilotage in the north sea, english channel, and the skagerrak
2024-03-22
Source: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/mgn-506-m-amendment-1-navigation-deep-sea-pilotage-in-the-north-sea-nglish-channel-and-the-skagerrak

Summary

The purpose of this notice is to give guidance to the mariner on the dep sea pilotage services available within the North Sea and English Channel Regions.

Amendment 1 of this notice includes updated contact information of the competent authorities both within the United Kingdom and other authorities within the North Sea area. These contact details can be found in Annex 1 of this notice.

1. Background

1.1 In 1976, the North Sea Pilotage Commission, recognising the importance of local pilotage, drew up useful guidance on this in their publication “Rules and Regulations for the Good Government of Deep-Sea Pilotage in the North Sea, English Channel and the Skagerrak”.  Later the issue was re-emphasised by the Council of the European Communities via Directive EC/79/115, which was adopted on 21 December 1978, and which related to the use of deep-sea pilots in the North Sea and English Channel.

1.2 IMO, recognising the arguments put forward by UK and other relevant European maritime Administrations, agreed that navigation safety plays an important part in reducing the risk of incidents at sea likely to cause loss of life, personal injury, marine pollution or damage to property and environment, and that, in appropriate circumstances, adequately qualified and certificated deep-sea pilots can make an effective contribution to the safety of navigation in confined and busy waters such as the North Sea, English Channel and the Skagerrak. Consequently, in November 1981, IMO adopted a resolution - “Recommendations on the Use of Adequately Qualified Deep-Sea Pilots in the North Sea, English Channel and Skagerrak”, A.486(XII).

1.3 In December 2013, recognising the need of revision to reflect changes and developments that have taken place since the adoption of the deep-sea pilotage resolution over 30 years ago, IMO revised the above and adopted resolution A.1080(28) retaining the same title.

2. Using Deep-Sea Pilotage Services

2.1 It is acknowledged that the Master of a ship is the best judge of the ship’s bridge team’s experience regarding challenging navigation situations.  However, to enhance the effectiveness of the bridge team for the safety of navigation and the protection of the marine environment, as well as to mitigate the effects of fatigue among bridge team members that might reasonably be expected due to increased workload in a busy and complex navigational environment, the following factors should be considered when determining the use of a deep-sea pilot:

• the familiarity of the ship’s bridge team with the congested waters of the North Sea, English Channel, and the Skagerrak.

• the existence and proliferation of navigational hazards, such as oil/gas installations and offshore renewable energy installations.

• the available depth of water in relation to draft, under keel clearance, vessel’s intended route and speed over various legs of the route.

• the possibility of adverse weather conditions and/or poor visibility.

• the port rotation schedule requirements.

• the availability and reporting requirements of Vessel Traffic Service coverage in the areas to be transited; and

• any other exceptional circumstances.

2.2 Recognising the significant risk control measures that are available, Masters are encouraged to use the services of deep-sea pilots when considered appropriate but only those who are certified as suitably qualified by a Competent Authority (Article 1.1 of EC Directive 79/115 EEC as amended by Article 47 of the Agreement on the EEA-1994), or who have an equivalent certificate issued by another North Sea coastal State.

2.3 Masters should always satisfy themselves as to the credentials of deep-sea pilots offering their services.  Ideally, a deep-sea pilot should carry a card meeting the general requirements as detailed in the annex to IMO Resolution A.1080(28).  The providers of deep-sea pilots are given in the Admiralty List of Radio Signals, Volume 6, Part 1.  This is published by the United Kingdom Hydrographic Office together with weekly Notices to Mariners in which any changes to providers’ details will be notified.

2.4 Owners or Masters of vessels intending to make use of the services of a deep-sea pilot in the North Sea, English Channel or the Skagerrak are strongly advised to use only a pilot certificated by a competent authority.

2.5 Attention is also drawn to Admiralty Chart No.5500 which gives detailed advice on the planning of passages in the English Channel and The Dover Strait, and similar publications of other coastal States bordering the North Sea, English Channel, or the Skagerrak.

3. Competent Authority for Deep-Sea Pilot Certification

3.1 In the United Kingdom, the Association of Deep-Sea Pilotage Authorities, comprised of the Corporations of Trinity House in Hull, London, and Newcastle, is authorised to grant deep-sea pilotage certificates under UK Pilotage Act 1987, c.21, Part II, para.23.  These bodies determine and enforce regulations governing the provision of pilots in accordance with the “Rules and Regulations for the Good Government of Deep-Sea Pilotage in the North Sea and English Channel and Skagerrak” drawn up by the North Sea Pilotage Commission and subsequently endorsed by the IMO.  This ensures that pilots who hold certificates granted by the authorised bodies are adequately qualified.

3.2 The bodies concerned are:

i) The Corporation of Trinity House of Deptford Strond

Tower Hill
London
EC3N 4DH

Tel: +44 (0)207 481 6900

ii) The Corporation of the Hull Trinity House

Trinity House Lane
Hull
HU1 2JG

Tel: +44 (0)1482 324956

iii) The Corporation of the Newcastle upon Tyne Trinity House

Trinity House
Broad Chare
Newcastle Upon Tyne
NE1 3DQ

Tel: +44 (0)191 232 226

3.3 The competent authorities in other IMO member States bordering on the North Sea, English Channel and the Skagerrak which may certify deep-sea pilots are listed in Annex 1.

More information

Technical Services Navigation
Maritime and Coastguard Agency
Bay 2/24
Spring Place
105 Commercial Road
Southampton
SO15 1EG

Email: navigationsafety@mcga.gov.uk

Website: www.gov.uk/mca

Please note that all addresses and telephone numbers are correct at time of publishing.
