MGN 580 (M) Amendment 1 - Fire protection - fire retardant treatments for fabrics
2025-04-10
Source: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/mgn-580-m-amendment-1-fire-protection-fire-retardant-treatments-for-fabrics

Fire Protection – Fire Retardant Treatments for Fabrics - Equivalent Testing Standards for Large Commercial Yacht Code.

1. Introduction / Background

1.1 Under the requirements of the Large Commercial Yacht Code, for vessels of 500GT and over, accommodation spaces should be provided with an automatic sprinkler system and, unless a fully addressable fire detection system is fitted, upholstery, bedding components and suspended textiles are required to be inherently fire retardant by complying with the relevant parts of the IMO Fire Test Procedures Code (FTP Code) or an equivalent standard acceptable to the Administration. Primary deck coverings within accommodation spaces, service spaces and control stations are to be of a type which will not readily ignite, or give rise to toxic or explosive hazards at elevated temperatures.

1.2 Under the requirements of the Large Commercial Yacht Code, for vessels of less than 500GT, unless the space is fitted with sprinklers or equivalent approved fixed fire extinguishing systems, upholstery and suspended textiles are required to be inherently fire retardant by complying with the relevant parts of the IMO Fire Test Procedures Code (FTP Code) or an equivalent standard acceptable to the Administration.

1.3 The MCA has been approached by companies wishing to provide fire retardant treatment on floor coverings, suspended textile materials, upholstery materials and bedding components, as an equivalence to inherently fire retardant materials, onboard vessels certificated under the Large Commercial Yacht Code.

1.4 In order to approve this type of fire protection equivalence, the MCA has to be assured that the fire retardant treatment process, including quality controls, is equivalent to appropriate standards of the IMO Fire Test Procedures Code (FTP Code).

1.5 To control the approval of these fire retardant treatments as an equivalent, the MCA has produced MCA Approval Procedures and a Declaration of Conformity for such treatments, which can be found as Appendixes 1 & 2, respectively, to this MGN.

2. Application Date

2.1 An Application Date of 01 January 2020 for Service Providers to comply with these Procedures will apply, after which date, the Service Provider of any fire retardant treatment used to protect floor coverings, suspended textile materials, upholstery materials and bedding components onboard United Kingdom or Red Ensign Group flag Large Commercial Yacht Code certificated vessels, must be approved, and certificated in accordance with these Procedures. The early application of the MGN is acceptable on a voluntary basis.

2.2 Meanwhile, until 01 January 2020, fire retardant treatment Service Providers may continue to apply their treatment onboard United Kingdom or Red Ensign Group flag Large Commercial Yacht Code certificated vessels, in accordance with MGN 453.

2.3 Notwithstanding the above, any prior approval in accordance with MGN 453 will be valid until the expiry date of the approval certificate.

2.4 The MCA will continue to monitor the continued successful use of this MGN and the equivalence it provides in order to determine future policy on the use of chemical sprays as an equivalence to IMO approved products. This may include the review of Declaration of Conformity during vessel surveys and inspections, as well as visits to Approved Bodies.

More Information

Marine Technology Branch
Maritime and Coastguard Agency,
Bay 2/23
Spring Place,
105 Commercial Road,
Southampton,
SO15 1EG.

Tel: +44 (0) 203 8172000.

e-mail: marinetechnology@mcga.gov.uk

Website Address: www.gov.uk/government/organisations/maritime-and-coastguard-agency .

General Enquiries: infoline@mcga.gov.uk
